+++
tags = []
categories = []
title = "A few bits about text on screens"
date = 2021-01-14T20:49:18+01:00
draft = false
+++

## The madness of font rendering in macOS

*macOS* font rendering is getting worse and worse for non-Retina screens.

The iPad renders crisp text, so can't comment on *iOS/iPadOS*, but on my
respectable 2560x1440 monitor, using *macOS Big Sur*, text seemed somewhat fuzzy. To the
point where I was thinking I'd have to buy a 4K monitor. On Windows and Linux,
the same monitor rendered text like a champ, so the problem was not
the screen.

Apple have been gradually dropping the smoothing configuration
options they used to offer, and now they
offer none. It seems they expect everyone to have 4K screens.

You can find some command-line hacks to tweak
the font smoothing to work better for low-mid resolutions,
but hacks like that are bound to disappear silently, sooner rather
than later.

There is good material in the web about the various forms of text anti-aliasing,
and their use in different operating systems.
I recommend [The Ails of Typographic Anti-Aliasing](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2009/11/the-ails-of-typographic-anti-aliasing/)

The article mentions that the [Firefox](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/)
browser handles rendering on its own, in an effort to render text sharper.

Aside from hunting for programs that subvert macOS, you may want to try out
different fonts at different weights. Some font combinations render very well.
Which brings me to:

## Monospaced fonts I recommend

Font choice is personal, but you should watch for a couple of font
characteristics that affect how well it renders on screen.

**Color/Thickness.** Some fonts are thicker/darker, some thinner/lighter.
For example, *Consolas* is on the
thick side, *IBM Plex Mono* is light. Aside from your personal
taste, thinner fonts may render better in software like Safari or, generally,
*macOS*, whereas Windows tends to thin fonts, so light fonts may appear
washed out. Not all programs in the same computer render text the same.

**Letter-spacing and rhythm.** The fixed width corset forces the strokes
to be thin and spidery in many designs. There's an inherent waste of space when
the letters `i` and `m` are allocated the same width,
and some font designs combat this by stretching
the letterforms to the max, leaving little space between letters, while others
embrace the irregular spacing. \
Aside from taste, font rendering may alter the spacing of letterforms. On some
programs or systems, a particular font may become crowded or spacey. \
In my experience, relaxed letter-spacing makes for more comfortable reading.

Given the variety of screens, resolutions, operating systems, and rendering
tweaks, it's good that we have several good fonts to choose from.

My personal favorites offer various weights, and relaxed letter-spacing. And
they render well on mac, even with a non-retina display.

Commercial

* [Gintronic](https://bboxtype.com/typefaces/Gintronic/) - lots of weights.
  Wide letter-spacing. A total rethink of what a coding font should be. I love it.
* [TheSansMono](https://www.lucasfonts.com/fonts/the-sans-mono) - lots of weights.
  Relaxed letter-spacing. From the same designer as
  [Consolas](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/typography/font-list/consolas),
  which it resembles, but with wider spacing more weights available.
  
Free

* [Input](https://input.fontbureau.com/) - lots of weights. Relaxed letter-spacing.
  A large family of fonts designed specifically for coding.
* [Overpass Mono](https://overpassfont.org/) -
  light-ish. Wide letter-spacing. No italics.
* [Fira Mono](https://bboxtype.com/typefaces/FiraMono/) -
  light. Relaxed letter-spacing. No italics.

## Configuration is for suckers

I used to keep my configuration files for Emacs, and for various Linux window
managers, and carried them with me, like a turtle.
That was foolish. I have mended my ways.

Today, on the various text editors I use, I just configure font and size, and a few
other prominent adjustments.
On Linux I use desktop environments, and barely configure them.

Linux is still a bit behind on support for HiDPI and switching between resolutions.
Some programs respect GNOME's settings, some don't.
Still, how far we've come.

I have come to think that a tell-tale sign of poor design is the over-abundance
of configuration options.

## The 16px standard for web, and, Bless the iPad

As a gentleman website-owner, I'm aware of the difficulty designing web pages. You
cannot know where your pages are going to be read. Font size, in particular, is maddening:
you might think that setting your font size in terms of percentages or *ems* will
ensure good rendering in most conditions, but I don't recommend it.

For some strange reason, 16px has become the baseline of font sizes on the web. Phones,
tablets, laptops: they all try to ensure 16px size is readable on their screens.
Desktop computers, what with the variety of screen sizes, resolutions,
scaling settings, are chaos.

But today, most good web designers will try to make sure their site renders well
on iPads.

iPads have an interesting feature. Since we hold them at book distance, we get
a better idea of the size of text on them.

And, here's the thing, 16px is small. Like 9pt, text in 16px is readable, but
not as comfortably readable as text set in 10pt or 11pt.

For comfortable reading on web, choose 18-22px.

The iPad may help you realize that you are, likely, reading text on your
computer screens at very small sizes.
